---
title: Just Mercy
tags: [justice, community]
---

[Just Mercy][just-mercy], where the attorney talks about the power of getting
to know his clients lives in their fullness, instead of merely treating them
as cases shuffling in and out of his inbox.

[An interview with Ta-Nehisi Coates][ta-nehisi-coates-hopeful], where amongst
other things, he talks about keeping a "neighbor mindset" when it comes to
issues arising where you live, rather than treating everyone else as strangers
to be dealt with by law enforcement. About the possibility of having community
elders, familiar and trusted, step in to defuse a situation, rather than
escalating to the police, which has the potential of inciting much more
violence.

Helena Norberg-Hodge recounts her surprise in *Ancient Futures* [{% cite
ancient-futures %}] when she realises that the informal, community justice
arrangement in the Ladakhi village she was staying with works well. Despite
Western pre-conceptions of justice having to be blind, impartial, meted out by
some objective third-party judge, the mediations sought out by the villagers
from their elected chief proves to be fair and accepted by all, precisely
because the community is close-knit and people know one another well.

Incarceration rates are growing out of hand in many developed countries, the
US being the #1 offender. But instead of helping bring justice to the victims
of crime, or healing a community hurt by crime, the court system alienates the
victims, claiming monopoly over the right to punish. Prison serves as a cash
cow for prison operators, and drives people to enter a cycle of recidivism
because of that brand of prison-bird that stays with them for life. "Prison
and its alternatives" [{% cite prison-alternatives %}] talks about other paths
to rehabilitation and community justice. e.g. the circle (traditional to some
Native American tribes) in which everyone in the community impacted by the
crime: perpetrators, victims, neighbours, friends and family come together to
talk through the situation in a non-hierarchical setting such that everyone's
voice is heard. Also notes that such counselling may not be appropriate for
all communities or situations, especially in cases where there is a powerful
faction that's able to overrule and silence others (e.g. in domestic violence
cases, where the community elders may side with the male perpetrator because
Tradition).

[just-mercy]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Just_Mercy
[ta-nehisi-coates-hopeful]: https://www.vox.com/2020/6/5/21279530/ta-nehisi-coates-ezra-klein-show-george-floyd-police-brutality-trump-biden