---
title: Collectivism
tags: []
---

As a Singaporean living in the States, I am often given to ponder the cultural
differences between the two countries.

The popular account of the East-West divide is that of collectivism vs.
individualism, actively propagated by both poles of the world in asserting
their regional identities. (cf LKY statements on "Singapore exceptionalism",
or almost any piece of mainstream reporting from a Western outlet on an
Eastern country)

Lived experience in the States, however, has often given me pause as to what
extent people actually _practice_ individualism, all rhetoric aside. I have
found its corporations just as hierarchical, its citizens just as prone to
bootlicking and mass delusions, just as willing to submit themselves to
becoming excellent sheep [{% cite excellent-sheep %}] as the finest
kiasu/kiasi in Singapore.

An unfortunate proportion of Americans still like to believe that their
individual enterprise will guarantee them individual gain, when their efforts
feed more into the capitalist system, for the benefit of a few wealthy
individuals at the top of the food chain, than ever before. Singaporeans
harbour no such delusions. Fortunately for us, decades of inundation by
Western media narratives have kept us on guard and skeptical about the claims
of our state-owned media. There's a saying, that to genuinely know what's
happening in your own country, you need only to look to the reports in the
foreign press. [Many Americans could stand to benefit from such a
practice.][us-covid-roast]

Kohr believes that the tendency towards collectivism boils down to the *scale*
of a society, regardless of its particular brand of professed ideology:
> But all this worship of the masses, the people, the nation, and of the
> institutions representing them, is collectivism under whatever name it goes.
> And collectivism is irreconcilable with the ideals of democracy which, like
> Western civilization, is inseparably linked with individualism. It is
> logical nonsense to accuse the Marxists of collectivist thinking because
> they place society above man, and then proclaim ourselves that the nation
> stands above the individual.

<blockquote>
  <div class="quote" markdown="1">

But even this will not make us look very different if we realize that
communism is not the only the *natural* system of huge organisms, but the
*only* system by which they can maintain themselves. Hugeness, as we have
seen, needs conscious direction, supervision, control, obedience,
conformity, efficiency, standardization, discipline, alikeness in habit and
thought, unity, centralism—all concepts which in their sum constitute the
essence and operating basis of socialism. Our empire being as huge as
Russia’s, and requiring the same continuous state of preparedness, will need
as much centralization and direction and, though we may call our brand
anti-communism or, perhaps, the mood of the age, it will be communism just
the same. Thus, a time will come when the two halves of the world, organized
along such different roads, will be identical in everything but their name.
And the reason for it will be the same which is responsible for the fact
that the only thing looking exactly like the North Pole is its very
opposite—the South Pole. And this will be the end of the process of
consolidation.    

  </div>{% cite breakdown-of-nations -L page -l 214 %}<cite class="attribution"></cite>
</blockquote>



[us-covid-roast]: https://twitter.com/killerguerilla/status/1255898600082739202
