---
title: Fuck 12
tags: [policing]
---

Prison guards, police have unchecked power => abuse (e.g. BLM police
brutality) [p. 26]

<blockquote>
  <div class="quote" markdown="1">
For if socially produced brutality, be it on an individual or mass scale, is
largely nothing but the spontaneous result of the critical volume of power
generated whenever the human mass reaches a certain magnitude, it can be
prevented only through a device that keeps power-breeding social size at a
sub-critical level. This can be accomplished in two ways: through the
increase of the controlling power to the level of the challenging power, or
through attacking the problem at its root by bringing about a decrease in
social size. The conventional method is to resort to the first alternative.
It provides saturation police forces large enough to match at all times the
latent power of the community. This is simple in small social units. But in
large ones it is both difficult and dangerous. It is difficult because, as
history has shown, social fusion in massive societies can unexpectedly reach
such a degree that no police force on earth can check it. And it is
dangerous because, as long as police power can check it, it possesses itself
the critical volume so that, to the extent that it saves us from popular
atrocities, it may present us with the subtler atrocities of a police state
instead.
  </div>
  <cite class="attribution">
    {% cite breakdown-of-nations -L page -l 34 %}
  </cite>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <div class="quote" markdown="1">
The answer therefore is not increase in police power, but reduction of
social size-the dismemberment of those units of society that have become too
big. If we want to eliminate the Chicago rate of crime, we must not educate
Chicago or populate it with members of the Salvation Army. We must eliminate
communities of the size of Chicago.
  </div>
  <cite class="attribution">
    {% cite breakdown-of-nations -L page -l 35 %}
  </cite>
</blockquote>

This is an interesting point, given [other discussions][just-mercy] on justice
on a human scale and within communities.

<blockquote>
  <div class="quote" markdown="1">
The great powers are the ones which are artificial structures and which,
because they are artificial, need such consuming efforts to maintain
themselves. As they did not come into existence by natural development but
by conquest, so they cannot maintain themselves except by conquest-the
constant reconquest of their own citizens through a flow of patriotic
propaganda setting in at the cradle and ending only at the grave.
  </div>
  <cite class="attribution">
    {% cite breakdown-of-nations -L page -l 58 %}
  </cite>
</blockquote>

Policing as requisite only in mass society?

Q: Links to colonial practices / slavery?

[just-mercy]: {% link _zettel/202101230320-just-mercy.md %}