---
title: "Social size: dynamics & interventions"
tags: [scale, community]
to_read: [grooming-gossip-language]
---

If it is true that, as Kohr says, it is unchecked power endowed by unchecked
size that causes all our social miseries and wars [{% cite
breakdown-of-nations -L chapted -l II.4 %}], how is one to go about checking
this power by checking the size of societies?

It is a compelling thesis certainly. Cooperation, mergers, collusion are all
common tactics of smaller entities, banding together in order to pose a
formidable threat against a pre-existing aggressor. But in forming such a
coalition, this new group gathers more power than the old bully, and as Kohr
would have it, begin to themselves inflict miseries unto others, now that they
have the upper hand and with no viable challengers to get in their way. And so
another coalition, larger and more powerful than this last, must form,
themselves acquire unchecked power, ad infinitum. Kohr himself describes this
dynamic well:

<blockquote>
  <div class="quote" markdown="1">
    For if socially produced brutality, be it on an individual or mass scale,
    is largely nothing but the spontaneous result of the critical volume of
    power generated whenever the human mass reaches a certain magnitude, it
    can be prevented only through a device that keeps power-breeding social
    size at a sub-critical level. This can be accomplished in two ways:
    through the increase of the controlling power to the level of the
    challenging power, or through attacking the problem at its root by
    bringing about a decrease in social size. The conventional method is to
    resort to the first alternative.    
  </div>
  <cite class="attribution">
    [{% cite breakdown-of-nations -L page -l 34 %}]
  </cite>
</blockquote>

Of course, he advocates for the alternative—that is to say, for societies and
communities to keep their own size in check so as to prevent the acquisition
of unchecked power. But such a notion seems almost laughable: which group, in
the dominant position, would voluntarily break themselves up and cede its
power so as to prevent the atrocities that come as as an inevitability of
size? It certainly seems to go against, if not nature, then at least the
globalist ideologies of our present age. The breakdown of over-large companies
certainly occurs, but they are seldom, if ever, voluntary. Most get broken up
only as a result of anti-trust laws, but such laws can only be enforced by the
state, who wields an even bigger stick, so to speak. There are no anti-trust
regulations for a United States, a China, or a Russia. Are we to hope that
these overgrown states would curb their imperialist tendencies through their
good graces alone?

Kohr goes on to claim that dividing the nation states down into their
constituent regions—many of them vying for independence in any case—would
completely solve the problem of war by distributing power:

<blockquote>
  <div class="quote" markdown="1">
    The re-establishment of small-state sovereignty would thus not only
    satisfy the never extinguished desire of these states for the restoration
    of their autonomy; it would disintegrate the cause of most wars as if by
    magic. There would no longer be a question of whether disputed Alsace
    should be united with France or Germany. With neither a France nor a
    Germany left to claim it, she would be Alsatian. She would be flanked by
    Baden and Burgundy, themselves then little states with no chance of
    disputing her existence. There would be no longer a question of whether
    Macedonia should be Yugoslav, Bulgarian, or Greek-she would be Macedonian;
    whether Transylvania should be Hungarian or Romanian-she would be
    Transylvanian; or whether Northern Ireland should be part of Eire or
    Britain; she would be nobody’s part. She would be North Irish. With all
    states small, they would cease to be mere border regions of ambitious
    neighbours. Each would be too big to be devoured by the other. The entire
    system would thus function as an automatic stabilizer.
  </div>
  <cite class="attribution">
    [{% cite breakdown-of-nations -L page -l 59 %}]
  </cite>
</blockquote>

At the risk of asking the obvious—presumably, these regions were once
autonomous on their own, and the nation-states as we know them (as mentioned
earlier on in the chapter) only got to their present size through wars. So how
is it exactly that we should expect the system to "function as an automatic
stabilizer" if that "stability" of those originally small states has already
been upended over and over throughout the course of history?

-

There are cultural groups that voluntarily limit the sizes of their immediate
communities. The [Hutterites], for instance, would split their communities
into two, as in binary fission, when their size exceeds approximately
[Dunbar's number][dunbars], founding a daughter colony nearby and sending half
their members to live there. But such groups are viewed more as curios than
the norm. What paths exist, leading from our present size-obsessed culture, to
cultures that recognise such scale-appropriate communities as a pre-requisite
for the good life?

Kohr also brings up the example of the Swiss (yes, that ideal wise state), who
when minority conflicts arose would tend to split their cantons so as to
create new independent regions where the minorities would no longer be at a
disadvantage. But this occurs in a landlocked, mountainous state with a
history of being a refuge from the expansionary states of the valley regions,
[{% cite the-art-of-not-being-governed %}] so one wonders how palatable such a
strategy would prove in other parts of the world.


[dunbars]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunbar%27s_number
[Hutterites]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hutterites#Daughter_colonies
