---
title: Specialisation
tags: [economics, specialisation, scale]
---

One of those classic things they teach you in economics classes, when reading
Adam Smith, is the concept of "specialisation"—the principle that every
corporation should identify their comparative advantage and specialise in it.

(Funnily enough, I recently found out that the familiar parable of the pin
factory trotted out in Adam Smith's _Wealth of Nations_ was in all likelihood
lifted straight from the pages of Arabic literature on economics... As were
many other familiar Enlightenment concepts. So much for academic integrity.
¯\\_(ツ)_/¯ [{% cite debt %}])

If specialisation and division of labour in the globalised economy are as
natural as the different limbs and organs of our body taking up different
tasks, what does this tell us about the former?

If even just a single vital organ fails in our bodies, it means we're toast,
unless we can get a suitable transplant in time.

When China shut down because of COVID-19 at the end of 2019, and the virus
subsequently spread all over the world, health systems the world over were hit
by severe shortages in PPE and other medical equipment, limiting their ability
to deal effectively with the growing pandemic—because the world's factory was
itself closed for business due to the virus.

When ubiquitous cloud service providers suffer downtime, it is now not just
the funny pages on the interwebs hosting cat photos that become inaccessible.
While I found myself unable to deploy changes to a company web app during a
recent AWS outage (that wasn't even directly hosted by AWS), that was probably
the least of our worries. Even activities that we think of as belonging to
meatspace are impacted.

<blockquote>
  <div class="quote" markdown="1">
    
    I... can't vacuum... because us-east-1 is down.

  </div>
  <cite class="attribution">
    <a href='https://twitter.com/geoffbelknap/status/1331690657170157568'>@geoffbelknap</a>
  </cite>
</blockquote>


People around the world literally can't clean their own houses, all because
some server farm in far-off North Virginia went down.

Yet we persist in holding to the myth of specialisation, taking the
attractive, low sticker prices ("economies of scale") it shows us at face
value. We grow more and more dependent on distant monopolies, more and more
vulnerable to single points of failure. Attempts at fostering local
alternatives [[1]] that might make us more resilient, meanwhile, get hauled up
before the WTO and denounced as "protectionist" and "obstacles to free trade".
Free trade! so free that Japan had to be [coerced at gun-point][kanagawa] to
open up its borders for trade to foreigners it couldn't be arsed to deal with.
Many ordinary people don't think twice about defending such practices—after
all, that's what the experts drilled into us via our schooling. But in the
end, who in the world really benefits from these brittle supply chains, these
profit machines over-optimised for "normal operating parameters"?

[1]: https://www.paulkingsnorth.net/bove
[kanagawa]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convention_of_Kanagawa