---
title: Scale Primitives
tags: [agriculture, scale, states, war]
---

{% blockquote mirrors-copulation-multiply %}

Despite all the hype surrounding "scale" today from SV, it seems to be a
civilisational instinct that's been with us since the earliest states,
playing itself out on larger and larger stages over the ages.

**Agriculture as the first multiplier** the imperative of primitive warfare,
"more people => more wars won", throwing in a dash of avarice and hubris,
encouraged the formation of permanent agricultural settlements. Although
agriculture is less efficient per person (vs hunting-gathering), it is more
efficient per land area, hence more accessible from a state nucleus. The
concentration within a small, reachable area, along with the relative
permanance of the cultivated land, meant that agricultural products were more
easily appropriated by the state (i.e. taxed). [{% cite
the-art-of-not-being-governed %}]. With the agricultural base, it was then
possible to provide the food and the manpower needed for waging more
devastating, and successful wars.

**(State) Warfare, the great anonymiser** universal currencies—coinage—became
important only between strangers. Credit systems were much more common within
communities and between neighbours. Encounters between friendly travellers and
locals were left to the arts of hospitality. But encounters between hostile
strangers (e.g. soldiers passing through) and locals—necessitated a form of
one-and-done exchange facilitated via a universal, interchangeable currency:
cold, hard cash. [{% cite debt %}]

<blockquote>
  <div class="quote"><p>
    "War is a collectivizing process, and large-scale collectivism is
    inherently warlike. If not militarist by nationai tradition, highly
    centralized states must become so by the very necessity of sustaining at
    home an inordinate, “unnatural” power concentration, by the threat of
    their governmental mobilization as felt by other nations, and by their
    almost inevitable transformation of commercial intercourse into organized
    economic warfare among great economic-political blocs. There can be no
    real peace or solid world order in a world of a few great, centralized
    powers.”
  </p></div>
  <cite class="attribution">
    Henry C. Simons, via {% cite breakdown-of-nations -L page -l 56 %}
  </cite>
</blockquote>