---
title: Youth of the Nation
tags: [youth]
---

The concentration of power: cultural, political, etc. in the hands of adults
has consequences—unquestioned and unquestionable. Ostensibly, this is so that
the young 'uns, who haven't eaten as much salt as the adults have eaten rice,
don't make stupid, inexperienced decisions that doom themselves and society.

In the face of the convergent climate and environmental crises—ignored and
denied for decades by the adults in the room; in the face of young people like
Greta Thunberg and the Sunrise Movement who have had to speak truth to power
and wisdom to the adults; in the face of the student debt crisis that
represents the intergenerational transfer of wealth from young students having
to enslave their futures for the sake of university administrators' and
football coaches' pay raises—what does the experience of adults count for?

The world's major religions and philosophies—Abrahamic and Confucian
alike—preach a love for children. They tell us that every fetus is a human
being and that abortion is evil, that more children make for a happy,
prosperous household, that children are the future—they will look after you in
your old age.

Yet parents are the most miserable people of the lot{% sidenote %}{% cite
citation-needed %}{% endsidenote %}. Women, the ones biologically charged
with this supposedly important duty, are treated as slaves in every extant
culture. States impose upon subjects to reproduce so as to raise conscripts
for wars and hands for planting the crops that fill the stomachs their armies
march on{% sidenote %}{% cite the-art-of-not-being-governed %}{%
endsidenote %}. All around the world, the cultures most bent on protecting
children in the womb are also the first ones to neglect and/or exploit them
once out of the womb.

So as natural selection for the most reproductively prolific progresses, the
cultures with the most adamant growth ideologies take over more of the world,
and the human base ripe for exploitation expands ever more efficiently. Penned
in by our sheer numbers, stacked one atop another, scarcity imposed onto
ourselves all the while claiming it to be the natural state of things, we are
told we need to still expand our intensive and exploitative agricultural
operations to feed the ever-growing number of mouths. [Who cares if that'll
turn the Amazon rainforest into savannah in just a couple of
decades?][amazon-rainforest-savannah] We're on a train headed off the
Malthusian cliff—and the only acceptable solution in the growth society is to
drive faster in the same direction, to scrunch up our eyes and hope we'll be
able to build such a technologically advanced train as we're riding in it,
we'll avoid dashing on the rocks below.

Impending cliff aside (*it's not important; ignore it; focus on <span
class='small-caps'>GDP</span> growth*), we each owe unpayable debts to our
parents, our elders, our countries, for bringing us into the world and
bringing us up—so show some filial piety! This life is a debt, a noose they
set over our necks right as we exited the womb. What are we, but an insurance
policy for their old age, a new peon to help service another's debts?

Welcome to the world. You're already saddled with debt, and you have no choice
in the matter. We simply had to find new debtors to repay those debts we
ourselves were saddled with by our parents. There is no way but forward.

[amazon-rainforest-savannah]: https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2019/oct/23/amazon-rainforest-close-to-irreversible-tipping-point