---
title: The Size Fetish
tags: [scale]
---

[LaJeunesse's tell-all](#google-ir-head-left) about Google's long, slow slide
into becoming Yet Another Big Greedy Co. made for some resigned, depressing
reading. Nothing much new in here of course, for recovering techno-utopians:
giant tech company promises to change the world and bring about a revolution,
just forgot to mention it'd be for the worse.

For someone who remembers the days when Google still coolly and proudly flew
its Don't Be Evil flag high, the lurching decline of that banner—from its motto
(circa 2000), to merely opening its code of conduct (2015, with its
incorporation into Alphabet, Inc.), to its [present
burial](https://gizmodo.com/google-removes-nearly-all-mentions-of-dont-be-evil-from-1826153393)
in the concluding sentence of said code (2018)—nevertheless comes as a
disappointment. Now laid to rest amongst the verbiage, this ex-motto
nevertheless still retains its significance in its phrasing; as Nietzsche
pointed out, one can't be evil without power. The struggle of good against evil
is inherently one of the oppressed against the powerful: "don't be evil" was
apt for when Google was but a small, young upstart against the likes of Yahoo!
in its heyday, but pretty much meaningless for the tech behemoth it is now,
with all the monopoly power it wields over the online advertising world, and
beyond.

The particulars here in this post bear some dwelling upon, I think, to help
shed some light on _how_ organisations—even those starting out with the
best intentions—descend into depravity:

> I’ve been asked many times since returning home, “What changed?”
>
> First, the people. The founders and visionaries behind the company, Larry
> Page and Sergey Brin, disengaged and left management in the hands of new
> senior executives. A new <span class='small-caps'>CEO</span> was hired to lead Google Cloud and a
> new <span class='small-caps'>CFO</span> was hired from Wall Street, and beating earnings
> expectations every quarter became the key priority. Every year, thousands of
> new employees join the company, overwhelming everyone who fought to preserve
> the company’s original values and culture. When I joined the company there
> were under 10,000 Googlers and by the time I left, there were over 100,000.

Without the people with the founding vision at the helm, it just gets that much
easier for those with more pedestrian capitalist ambitions to take over. At a
certain size and stature in the market, it becomes hard _not_ to attract the
type of employee that seizes upon the company primarily in its position as
widely acknowledged status symbol; a fetish object, if you'd like—the type of
employee who is prepared to take the company precisely where Wall Street wants
it to go. See also: {% cite breakdown-of-nations -L page -l 28 %} for example,
of this passage:

> {% marginnote %}{% cite breakdown-of-nations -L page -l 28 %}{% endmarginnote %}
> But there is one element capable of accumulating its physical substance so
> far and so unequivocally beyond the critical limit that no force on earth
> can check it. This is the immense collective bulk of the most courted
> organism of our time, the human mass, the people which, at a given size and
> density, not only generates the ideal condition of anonymity at which a
> greater number of individuals can, without danger of detection, sweep up
> critical quantity of power than would be possible at the more translucent
> lesser densities; at a given point the mass becomes itself so spontaneously
> vile that, in addition to the increased quantum of individual misdeeds,
> performed under the cloak of its darkening multitudes, it begins to produce
> a quantum of its own, and wholly detached, badness that bears a relationship
> to its size, but not to the nature of the human molecules composing it.

> {% marginnote %}{% cite breakdown-of-nations -L page -l 35 %}{% endmarginnote %}
> Again we shall find that the dreaded result of a society’s behaviour is the
> consequence not of evil schemes or evil disposition but of the power that is
> generated by excessive social size. For whenever a nation becomes large
> enough to accumulate the critical mass of power, it will in the end
> accumulate it. And when it has acquired it, it will become an aggressor, its
> previous record and intentions to the contrary notwithstanding.

> {% marginnote %}{% cite breakdown-of-nations -L page -l 76 %}{% endmarginnote %}
> For large-scale tyranny becomes not only respectable and practically
> irremovable because of the impressive physical force it is able to muster in
> its defence; it becomes doubly so by breeding at a critical magnitude in the
> people the appropriate philosophy of submission.
<div class="section-break">&</div>

> {% marginnote %}{% cite breakdown-of-nations -L page -l 154 %}{% endmarginnote %}
> From whatever point we may look at it, the idea of a rising living standard
> produced by modern large-scale economic development seems little more than a
> myth magnified by repetition to a degree that it has taken on the appearance
> of unchallengeable truth.
>
> Before the optimum size of organization is reached, be it in companies or in
> labour unions, such additions are used in the fulfilment of their economic
> functions; after it has been reached, they are squandered in personal or
> political dissipation, in unwarranted speculations, in unwarranted political
> pets, in unwarranted displays of power, or in that most wasteful of economic
> activities: the construction of an idling financial security belt with  which
> overgrown enterprises must surround themselves to withstand disasters that
> may never occur or, if they do, may not be worth surviving.

<p class="section-break">&</p>

In the corridors of the Columbia Center for Career Education hangs a
collection of business-speak motivational posters. The one that I remember to
this day was one that said: "Columbia <span class='small-caps'>CCE</span>: not just finance or
consulting."

I hope they've remembered to update it to a more modern slogan: "Columbia <span class='small-caps'>CCE</span>: not just finance, consulting, or tech."

<div class="section-break">&</div>

What sort of a totem is a company like Google? 

There is nothing so certain in life as death and taxes{% sidenote %}And the
latter certain only if you are a subject of a state. Most people in the 21st
century are such subjects, having no other choice, nation-states having now
successfully enclosed every last square inch of the Earth.{% endsidenote %},
which makes both worthy of close examination (cf [this other post on boundary
conditions](boundary-conditions.html)). Mortal man, doomed to die;
in _Denial of Death_, Ernest Becker points to that strain of thought passed to
us from the Homeric epics of the heroic self, transcending death through famed
deeds that will be remembered through the generations. "Man cannot endure his
own littleness unless he can translate it into meaningfulness on the largest
possible level." Such a transcendence is reserved solely for the masculine,
for “Nature conquers death not by creating eternal organisms but by making it
possible for ephemeral ones to procreate,” but since even animals procreate,
and the procreative role of woman anchors man down too to the wild beasts of
the Earth, the only way for man to honourably conquer death is through his
intellect and those faculties he deems to be uniquely human.


<div style="display: none;">{% cite google-ir-head-left %}</div>

