---
layout:     essai
title:      "Writing: the First Simulacrum"
subtitle:   "or, The Case Against Writing: An Essay"
---

At the confluence of several rivers of ideas I've been tracing recently, I
found literacy. Or rather, a re-examination of the gospel of literacy—and with
it, our notions of civilisation.

One was _The Art of Not Being Governed: An Anarchist History of Upland
Southeast Asia_{% cite the-art-of-not-being-governed %}, where James C. Scott
draws the link between writing state bureaucrats, and the oral traditions—and
indeed, strategies—of state-evading peoples.

By happy coincidence, I've been listening rather a lot to the *Ideas* episodes
that David Cayley had produced over the years. Coming out of reading Scott, I
jumped on _Modes of Thought_{% cite modes-of-thought %} as the logical
continuation of that re-examination of literacy. Discussed therein: speech can
exist only as a dialogue between two or more parties, whereas writing, and its
sibling reading, takes place in comparative solitude, necessitating
interpretations of texts that the author may or may not have intended.

Almost simultaneously added to that cacophony in my head was Baudrillard (via
Said's _Orientalism_), and Borges (via Baudrillard). The former, for his
post-modern take, in both style and argumentation, on our media and
socio-political environments. We're trapped in a simulation of our own making,
acting out against our own shadowy projections on the cave wall. A compelling
thesis, to be sure, though perhaps applicable in some extent as well to more
than just the post-modern condition. Then of course Borges: with that map as
large as the country it was supposed to represent, and the planet Tlön, where
the metaphysicians "seek not truth, or even plausibility—they seek to amaze,
astound. In their view, metaphysics is a branch of the literature of fantasy".
Tlön, in turn an imaginary realm referred to by the literature of Uqbar, where
a heresiarch was to have said, _Mirrors and copulation are abominable, for
they multiply the number of mankind_. And Uqbar, an fabrication by a secret
society, described within an article of a fictional journal, reflected on
honestly in a postscript by the original author, itself appearing in an
anthology of _Fictions_. Mirror in mirror in mirror; on Earth as it is in
Tlön. In Tlön _as_ it is on Earth.

Which brings me to this: writing is reified representation. Where orality
implies a certain transience, words with wings that were carried away on the
winds even as oral traditions were passed down through the generations in
recitation, writing, with its material manifestation, is words made captive.
For the first time, our thoughts were not just abstract collections of sounds
we made at each other; they existed solidly in the real world alongside the
grasses, the trees, the birds. One could use such a real physical object as a
writing tablet or paper to represent other real, physical objects that were a
little more unwieldy to carry around. The number of trees in a forest; the
amount of barley due in taxation from each town and village; the debt owed by
those pressed into indentured servitude; a kingly proclamation of debt amnesty
for those pressed into indentured servitude—which was exactly the original
function of the Rosetta Stone. One would not be hard pressed to identify those
stages of the precession of simulacra here. We once used words to represent
some underlying reality. These representations changed with time and with
retellings, due to bad memory and opportune creative reinterpretations. When
we came up with writing, those representation themselves became inscribed into
the very fabric of reality, frozen in time and subject to interpretation just
as the world around us is subject to interpretation. We came up with even more
writing to enter into conversation with other writing—and the mimeograph of
literate human civilisation makes photocopies endlessly on.

Paul Kingsnorth, writer and recovering environmental activist, recently
discovered to his horror that the writing that's defined his career was an
intrinsic part of the civilisational apparatus he was trying to dismantle with
his uncivilised writings. That's a sordid tale that seems to have come out of
its own accord in _Savage Gods_—yes, he wrote about it.

Which reminds me that I should go read _The Spell of the Sensuous_. More later.
